Added project details for GSoC '23 (#106)
oppia/oppia-web-developer-docs: Google-Summer-of-Code-2023.md

Please note that the list of project ideas below is not set in stone: more projects may be added later, and some project descriptions may also change a bit, so check back regularly. In addition, the mentor assignments listed below are provisional, and may change depending on which proposals are eventually accepted.

> The list of projects for this year will be added soon.

Reviewer: You probably want to delete this line.

### Learner and Creator Experience (LaCE) team

1.1. [Implementing the “Needs Guiding Responses” section of the lesson analytics dashboard](#11-implementing-the-needs-guiding-responses-section-of-the-lesson-analytics-dashboard)

1.2. [Improving the lesson creation experience](#12-improving-the-lesson-creation-experience)

### Contributor Dashboard team

2.1. [Contributor Dashboard Admin Stats Table](#21-contributor-dashboard-admin-stats-table)

2.2. [Prioritized Translation Languages and Auto-Translations](#23-improvements-for-translation-reviewer-experience)

### Developer workflow team

> 4.1. [Dockerize Oppia](#41-dockerize-oppia)

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be 3.1-3.5?

1.5. [Learner dashboard redesign](#15-learner-dashboard-redesign)

1.6. [Improve math interactions](#16-improve-math-interactions)

1.7. [Accessibility improvements](#17-accessibility-improvements)

### Contributor Dashboard team

2.1. [Contributor Dashboard Admin Stats Table](#21-contributor-dashboard-admin-stats-table)

2.2. [Prioritized Translation Languages and Auto-Translations](#23-improvements-for-translation-reviewer-experience)

2.3. [Improvements for translation reviewer experience](#23-improvements-for-translation-reviewer-experience)

### Server data validation team

3.1. [Fix Validation Errors](#31-fix-validation-errors)

### Developer workflow team

4.1. [Dockerize Oppia](#41-dockerize-oppia)

4.2. [Developer Workflow Release Dashboard](#42-developer-workflow-release-dashboard)

4.3. [Developer Workflow Telemetry Dashboard](#43-developer-workflow-telemetry-dashboard)

4.4. [Make CI faster](#44-make-ci-faster)

4.5. [Normalize Usage of Feature Flags](#45-normalize-usage-of-feature-flags)

## Learner and Creator Experience (LaCE) team

### 1.1. Implementing the “needs guiding responses” section of the lesson analytics dashboard

**Project Description:**

> Oppia has, for each exploration, an “improvements tab” that shows common wrong answers to a question. This allows lesson creators to subsequently improve the lessons. (For example, if a particular wrong answer isn’t addressed well by the existing feedback, and is being submitted regularly, then we can detect this and update the lesson.) This is important for ensuring that learners don’t get stuck.

Reviewer 2: Maybe note that the improvements tab is not currently displayed?

> Unfortunately, the existing stats dashboard is somewhat unwieldy and not well-suited for easily taking action to update lessons. A new [improvements tab](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1GOrwZhVKCunSmOgbvMDaGFU2LSjT_MOf/view) that is more editor-friendly has already been (mostly) designed. This improvements tab shows improvements that can be made to the exploration, categorized by bounce rate, incomplete learning, and specific wrong answers for cards.

Reviewer 2: I worry that readers will get the stats tab and the improvements tab confused. What's the relationship between the lesson analytics dashboard, the improvements tab, the stats tab, and the stats dashboard?

* **Milestone 2:** Implement the UI for the “Card-Level Improvements > Needs Guiding Responses” section of the improvements tab. This section should correctly display answers for the various different types of interactions (note that the mock in the “Useful Resources” section only shows one such type, which is TextInput answers). It should also display an “Address Answers” call-to-action which, when clicked, brings the user to the relevant part of the main exploration editor tab, which would also open the “Add Response” dialog box with a reminder of the wrong answers they still need to address, so that they can add new answer groups and feedback for them (see more details [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1qQbW9Z_cgJ1mwU0hzBpPVS_4WLT_l_08ZixLR1G2bvQ/edit#heading=h.c63b1rerczu8)).

**Dependency on Release Schedule:**  Since this project involves a step to generate archival models, the timeline should be arranged so that this step can be run and verified during the appropriate release cycle.

> **Proposal notes:**

Reviewer 2: Releases are delayed by up to a month with some regularity. We should warn applicants of this and advise them to build in time for such delays into their timelines

ditto for all projects with release dependency

(**Note**: If desired, you may submit a proposal for a <span style="text-decoration:underline;">half-size project</span> covering EITHER both options (a) and (b), OR option (c). If you do this, please label your proposal accordingly with “parts (a) + (b)” or “part (c)” in the title.)

For (a): The current exploration history tab allows comparison between each “state card”, but doesn’t include details of the exploration metadata. An additional box containing these details should be added to the comparison graph.

For (b): In the state editor, it should be possible to see a “Last edited by XXX at version YYY” annotation (excluding translation commits) at the bottom right. Clicking this should open a pop-up modal that shows the changes made to the card in that last edit, and a further link at the bottom right saying “Previously edited by XXX at version YYY” which, when clicked, advances the modal to the previous change, and so on. (This is intended to function a little bit like “git blame” in the GitHub UI.)

> For (c): In the state editor, when a change is made to a part of a card and this results in a “should translations be updated?” pop-up modal, the modal should also include a list of the existing languages for which that content has been translated, and the currently-saved translations for those languages. The lesson creator should be asked to update these translations if the changes are trivial to do (e.g. the content is just numbers), and otherwise leave them alone by default. This will help to save some re-translation work for the community. **Note**: these translation changes should not be applied immediately – if the lesson creator subsequently discards their change before committing it to the backend, then those translation changes should also be discarded.

Reviewer 2: > otherwise leave them alone by default

In this case, we mark the translations as needing to be updated, right? Should the creator be able to affirm that the original translation is fine without changes (e.g. if the creator was fixing a typo that didn't appear in the translations)

**Size of this project:** large (~350 hours); can be reduced to medium (~175 hours) if desired (see description)

**Potential Mentors:**

**Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

* Knowledge and understanding of Python
* Knowledge and understanding of TypeScript, Angular, HTML, and CSS
* Ability to write Beam jobs
* Technical design skills
* (Ideally) Some UI/UX design skills

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:** Creators should be able to see changes to an exploration’s metadata in the comparison view in the history tab. They should also be able to navigate through all the historical changes to a particular state (excluding changes that solely affect translations).
* **Milestone 2:** Creators should be able to see a list of existing translations through the modal that pops up when they make changes to a published exploration, and should be able to edit those if the edits are easy to make.

**Dependency on Release Schedule:** Some sections of this proposal may entail writing Beam jobs to update existing server data. The timeline should be arranged so that such jobs can be run and verified during the appropriate release cycle.

**Proposal notes:**

> * The main thing that is important to demonstrate in the proposal for this project is good technical design skills. Strong proposals would first show a good understanding of the current system, and correctly describe the parts of it that are relevant to the relevant subproject, before suggesting the minimal changes that would be needed in order to achieve the desired functionality.

Reviewer 2: Can we remove "minimal"? I think we care that the applicant propose a workable set of changes to achieve the desired functionality. If the right way to do that is to do a broader set of refactors, that's okay

* For (b), some precomputation may be needed in order to retrieve the version of the "previous change" quickly.
* For (b), it would be useful to generalize the system so that one can go forward/back from any given state. This would allow additional useful functionality like clicking on a state in a particular version when it's shown in the history tab, and moving forward/back through its history. Be sure to handle state additions, deletions and renames correctly!

**Useful resources:**

* How to write Apache Beam jobs: [wiki page](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/wiki/Apache-Beam-Jobs)
* Release schedule: [wiki page](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/wiki/Release-schedule-and-other-information)

> ### 1.3. Serial chapter launch

Reviewer 2: I have a slight preference for leaving out these TBA projects until we have more details, that way our page doesn't look quite as incomplete.

TBA

### 1.4. User feedback reporting UI on Web

TBA

### 1.5. Learner dashboard redesign

TBA

### 1.6. Improve math interactions

TBA

### 1.7. Accessibility improvements

TBA

## Contributor Dashboard team

### 2.1. Contributor Dashboard Admin Stats Table

**Project Description:**

Contributor dashboard admin page revamp. Table view of contributors with key stats, e.g. number of translations/questions submitted/reviewed. Each row represents a contributor and is actionable, allowing an admin to add or remove contribution rights. 

**Size of this project:** medium (~175 hours)

**Potential Mentors:** 

**Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

* Knowledge and understanding of Python
* Knowledge and understanding of TypeScript, Angular, basic HTML, and CSS

**Suggested Milestones:**

> * **Milestone 1:** Complete the complete backend changes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Milestone 1:** Complete the backend changes:
```

  - Introduce language coordinator admin role
  - Modify contributor dashboard admin controller to allow adding or removing language coordinators
  - Add new endpoint to contributor dashboard admin controller for fetching contributor stats

* **Milestone 2:** Complete the frontend changes:
  - Display contributor stats table on contributor dashboard admin page
  - Show different available admin actions depending on user admin role
  - Add support for sorting by table column (will require some backend query changes)
  - Implement table pagination

> **Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

Reviewer 2: We consider a milestone to be done when satisfactory changes are merged into develop, right? (i.e. they don't need to be deployed to production) If so, can we put "None" here?

ditto for the other blank sections. I think it's good to put "None" to make clear that we didn't forget about it

* To support sorting by table column, we’ll need to add a sort key for each attribute. The sort key will be used in the storage query. See PR [#1653](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/pull/16534) for an example. 
* Pagination is hard. See PR [#16289](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/pull/16289) to see how pagination was added to the existing contributor stats tables.

**Useful resources:**

### 2.2. Prioritized Translation Languages and Auto-Translations

**Project Description:**

Support the marking of languages as “prioritized” for translation. Prioritized languages will have their remaining untranslated lesson text content auto-translated to make the lessons available in the language as quickly as possible. Auto-translated content will appear with a note explaining the auto-translation. Non-prioritized languages will also be auto-translated after a threshold of translation, e.g. 95%. 

Additionally, finish adding [computer-aided translation (CAT)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kJd-yLTzB9a2c3Nq7v9pzKfHwKHKGpkWfQ8B0YGf50U/edit#heading=h.24wysknhgyrz) support when submitting translation suggestions. 

**Size of this project:** medium (~175 hours)

> **Potential Mentors:** 

Reviewer 2: How about putting "TBA" for the mentors, again to make clear that we didn't forget about this section?

**Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

* Knowledge and understanding of Python
* Knowledge and understanding of TypeScript, Angular, basic HTML, and CSS

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:** Complete the backend framework for prioritized languages:
  - Add notion of prioritized language in backend storage schemas
  - Store list of prioritized languages
  - Create beam job to auto-translate remaining text content for a prioritized language

* **Milestone 2:** Surface prioritized languages in the UI and add CAT support:
  - Enable the adding of a prioritized language in the contributor dashboard admin page
  - Add note to lesson text content that has been auto-translated
  - Auto-translate non-prioritized language once translation threshold has been achieved (95%)
  - Add computer-aided translation capability to translation contribution modal

> **Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

Reviewer 2: The Beam jobs create a release dependency, don't they?

**Proposal notes:**

* We’ll likely write a beam job to populate the auto-translations for a language. See the [wiki](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/wiki/Apache-Beam-Jobs) for more details. 
* Maybe ~80% of the CAT work is already done, including all of the backend changes. We just need to hook it up in the frontend, e.g. see working PR: [#12624](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/pull/12604/files) and related issue [#11434](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/issues/11434). 
  - See Computer Aided Translations (CAT) backend milestone PRs.
* The CAT backend utilizes the Google Translate API for auto-translations. We can re-use that work here for auto-translations. Alternatively, we can investigate other translate APIs that may offer better translations, e.g. Oppia has done studies in the past that have shown Microsoft to produce preferred translations.

**Useful resources:**

### 2.3. Improvements for translation reviewer experience

**Project Description:**

> Translation reviewers have given feedback such that the current contributor dashboard reviewer workflow doesn’t match with their most of the needs. This project aims to improve the translation reviewer experience in the contributor dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Translation reviewers have given feedback that the current contributor dashboard reviewer workflow doesn’t meet their needs. This project aims to improve the translation reviewer experience in the contributor dashboard.
```

**Size of this project:** large (~350 hours)

**Potential Mentors:** 

**Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

* Knowledge and understanding of Python
* Knowledge and understanding of TypeScript, Angular, HTML, and CSS

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:**

>   - Showing translation cards according to the order of the content flow in the lesson. Exploration editor should also be linked so that the original lesson can be seen.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Show translation cards in the same order as content flows in the lesson. The appropriate exploration editor should also be linked so that the original lesson can be seen.
```

What if the translator doesn't have permission to edit the lesson? They won't be able to see the editor, will they?

  - Showing the size of the translation(short/large)
  - Pin/unpin specific lessons to translate

* **Milestone 2:**
  - Ability to revert the acceptance or rejection of cards. The exact time limit that we allow to undo the review should be decided.
  - Showing image alt text below the image

>   - Notifying new submissions through emails

Reviewer 2: I don't think this project is ready to be posted. It's too vague, and key decisions remain. For example, "The exact time limit that we allow to undo the review" is a design parameter that we should decide on ahead of time

Reviewer 2: I'm pulling the project for now

**Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

**Proposal notes:**

* To support lesson pinning, we have to make sure the pinned lessons are returned at the top of the list of lessons with translation suggestions in the fetch query [here](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/blob/develop/core/controllers/contributor_dashboard.py#L336).
* We will likely want to introduce a new storage model to track pinned lessons by language and user.

**Useful resources:**

## Server data validation team

### 3.1. Fix Validation Errors

> TBA

Reviewer 2: We do have a doc for this one: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JNJ6mBHKDfHcNGdNgGYWbUO_FHx_E_myd8FChwy3Gao/edit#

## Developer workflow team

### 4.1. Dockerize Oppia

**Project Description:**

> We want to package Oppia as a Docker container so that new contributors can get started by running docker-compose up -d after cloning the repository to install all the dependencies and start the local development server. This will be much easier than the current installation process, which is often painful to troubleshoot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to package Oppia as a Docker container so that new contributors can get started by running `docker-compose up -d` after cloning the repository to install all the dependencies and start the local development server. This will be much easier than the current installation process, which is often painful to troubleshoot. Docker will also let us speed up test runs on GitHub Actions by caching the Docker image.
```

Added the note about GitHub Actions to address this comment on the idea doc: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1DnNy87Vhpa6748RzvsDKtAfzyl8DRRexPTFPVhFxYXU/edit?disco=AAAAphfDuHY

Requirements:
* Setup should be quick and easy. For example, a user might need to:
  - Install Docker 
  - Clone oppia/oppia 

>   - Run docker-compose up -d

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Run `docker-compose up -d`
```

* The setup should be independent of the OS or platform it is run on.
* The setup should not exceed the 8GB RAM requirement for Oppia on any platform for which we have supported installation instructions.
* It should be easy for a user to update their installation to the current dependency versions.
* It should be easy to reset the environment, for example if the internet connection fails and so a dependency is only partly installed.
* Developers should be able to run tests, use git (e.g. switch branches, push changes, and checkout commits), and use all the other development tools we document in the wiki. The interface for doing so should undergo only minimal changes.
* Maintainers should be able to easily upgrade Oppia’s dependencies (e.g. change requirements.in to specify updated versions) and check that the local server still works. When those updates are merged into develop, all developers should be smoothly upgraded to the new versions.
* All dependencies must be pinned to a specific version and come from a trustworthy source. We should also verify dependency checksums before installing them.

> * All installations should happen via Docker or bash commands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* All installations should happen via Docker or standard command-line tools.
```

I'm discussing what the exact requirement is with @gp201, but I think this is closer to what we'll decide on

* Should use Docker compose V2 (since compose V1 has been [deprecated](https://www.docker.com/blog/announcing-compose-v2-general-availability/)).

**Size of this project:** large (~350 hours)

**Potential Mentors:** 

> **Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

Reviewer 2: Applicants should by familiar with Python and have some exposure to Docker

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:** The server launch should be successful and all Oppia pages should be functioning correctly.

* **Milestone 2:** All tests should be executed locally and the migration of GitHub actions to utilize docker, including caching of docker images, should be completed.

**Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

**Proposal notes:**

**Useful resources:**

### 4.2. Developer Workflow Release Dashboard

**Project Description:**

The aim of this project is to create a dashboard for release testers and team leads on the Oppia developer team. The dashboard should be built as a standard App Engine app that supports login. It should show a list of all commits in develop. For each commit, it should show the status of the release candidate (RC) that was built for that commit:
* A link to the RC (note: you can find links at the bottom of runs, e.g. https://github.com/oppia/release-scripts/actions/runs/3987166674).
* Did that RC pass acceptance testing, fail acceptance testing, or get skipped?
* For all RCs that pass acceptance testing:

>   - **Prod server**. Show a button next to each deployable RC to deploy it to prod. An RC is deployable if it is strictly newer (here “newer” refers to commit order, not the timestamp on the commit) than the currently-deployed RC. Deploying should be restricted to members of the team-leads-and-release-coordinators Google Group or allowlist; when clicked, it should notify that mailing list. The deployed version should be formatted on App Engine as {{tag}}-{{commithash}}, where {{tag}} is the release version (e.g. “3.2.1”).

Reviewer 2: I just updated the deployment criteria with feedback from Sean.

```suggestion
  - **Prod server**. Show a button next to the deployable RC (if present) to deploy it to prod. An RC is deployable if it is strictly newer (here “newer” refers to commit order, not the timestamp on the commit) than the currently-deployed RC, all CI tests are passing, all acceptance tests are passing, no newer RC meets the preceding deployability requirements (i.e. only the newest RC with passing tests is deployable). Deploying should be restricted to members of the team-leads-and-release-coordinators Google Group or allowlist; when clicked, it should notify that mailing list. The deployed version should be formatted on App Engine as {{tag}}-{{commithash}}, where {{tag}} is the release version (e.g. “3.2.1”).
```

  - **Test server**.
    - If the RC is currently provisioned on a test server, show a link to that test server.
    - If not, show a button to provision a test server on BrowserStack with this RC. This button should be restricted to members of the release-testers Google Group or allowlist. Once provisioned, it should send an email to the requester and the status in the dashboard should be updated. The deployed version should be formatted as {{tag}}-{{commithash}}, where {{tag}} is the release version (e.g. “3.2.1”).

(Note that the team-leads-and-release-coordinators Google Group will be a member of the release-testers Google Group.)

Pagination should be included to allow paging through multiple pages of commits (50 per page), but it is fine not to go back more than 300 commits or so.

Include full documentation on how to update code, test, and deploy new releases of this app. The app will also need unit tests and linting, and to support easy developer setup.

**Size of this project:** large (~350 hours)

**Potential Mentors:** 

> **Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

Reviewer 2: I just added these to the idea doc:

* Frontend development (probably Angular, but we don’t require that)
* Backend development (probably Python, but we don’t require that)

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:** Create a new repo for the release dashboard and include setup, update, test and deployment instructions, as well as CI checks that run all the tests and ensure that all code is 100% tested before an update can be merged to develop. The release dashboard should show a table with a paginated list of commits, their release candidates, and their acceptance test statuses.

> * **Milestone 2:** For all release candidates that pass acceptance testing, the release dashboard should have buttons that support deploy-to-prod-server and deploy-to-test-server functionality. These buttons should be correctly access-controlled and should send the appropriate notification emails when clicked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Milestone 2:** For the appropriate release candidates, the release dashboard should have buttons that support deploy-to-prod-server and deploy-to-test-server functionality. These buttons should be correctly access-controlled and should send the appropriate notification emails when clicked.
```

I updated the idea doc too. Now that we have a detailed description of what's deployable, we can just reference that

> **Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

Reviewer 2: I can confirm that there is no dependency

- Change failure rate (how often we get a defect in develop)
- Lead time for changes: (how long it takes for a commit to get deployed to Oppia.org)

You can see an example of what this dashboard might look like in the visualization here, but there is no requirement that you use this [library](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/fourkeys#dashboard).

Also, include full documentation on how to update code, test, and deploy new releases of this app. The app will also need unit tests and linting, and to support easy developer setup.

**Size of this project:** medium (~175 hours)

**Potential Mentors:** 

**Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:** Create a new repo for the telemetry dashboard and include setup, update, test and deployment instructions, as well as CI checks that run all the tests and ensure that all code is 100% tested before an update can be merged to develop. The telemetry dashboard should show at least one chart and summary statistic (of your choice) of the four that are given.

* **Milestone 2:** The telemetry dashboard should show all four metrics, and be added to the Oppia team’s wiki and broadcast to the dev team.

> **Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

Reviewer 2: There is no dependency

  - Create a build artifact that gets reused in all workflows. (Currently, build artifacts can’t be persisted across workflows, but this GitHub action for uploading to GCS might be helpful.)
  - Run the full versions of all pre-push tests (mentioned above) first, and block other tests on these. (If any of the pre-push tests fail, then do not run the other CI checks.)
  - For long-running tests:
    - If the test is essential, find a way to make it shorter.
    - If it is not, remove it from CI and put it in an acceptance layer that only runs on some release-candidate builds (see below). 
- Split off less-important long-running tests into acceptance tests:
- Create a GitHub Action that, at regular time intervals, takes the latest release-candidate build on develop that passes all CI checks, runs the acceptance tests on them. Builds that pass all acceptance tests should have a public, machine-readable indication that they did, and builds that cause an acceptance test failure should result in an email or chat notification to the CI Stability team.

**Size of this project:** large (~350 hours)

**Potential Mentors:** 

> **Knowledge/Skills Recommended:**

Reviewer 2: From the doc:

* Familiarity with GitHub Actions and workflows.
* Clear understanding of the current Oppia pre-push and CI pipeline.

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:** CI checks run in under an hour. Less important tests are split off into an acceptance layer.

* **Milestone 2:** Pre-push checks run in under 5 minutes.

**Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

> **Proposal notes:**

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth linking to the idea doc (https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pIAu06LJS39BUeRyPZVWFYSW9aIKDrA_z7uoNtzoe9I/edit#) here since there's a lot more detail there and in the PRD

- Feature flags should support rollbacks. There seems to be an [issue](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/issues/16416) with rollbacks not being correctly captured that should be diagnosed and fixed.
- Extend the current functionality to allowlist specific usernames for external trusted tester programs.
- Ensure the documentation is sufficiently complete so that developers are used to creating feature flags for new features, and have no questions about how to do so.

**Size of this project:** medium (~175 hours)

**Potential Mentors:** 

**Knowledge/Skills Recommended:** Python and TypeScript

**Suggested Milestones:**

* **Milestone 1:** The feature flags dashboard is moved from /admin to /release-coordinator. It is also made more intuitive; in particular, the common case of switching a boolean flag on and off is easy for developers to do.  Feature flags support rollbacks (see [#16416](https://github.com/oppia/oppia/issues/16416)).

* **Milestone 2:** Feature flags support allowlisting specific user IDs for external trusted tester programs. The documentation for handling feature flags is fully complete and developers use feature flags as a matter-of-course, without any issues.

> **Dependency on Release Schedule:** 

Reviewer 2: There is no dependency, unless the applicant proposes using beam jobs (which I don't think they'll need)
